Today we study conjugate gradient through its geometric meaning: minimizing a quadratic energy.
The algorithm is not just a clever recurrence.
It is a sequence of optimal corrections in the geometry defined by a symmetric positive definite matrix.
For a symmetric positive definite system Ax=b, define phi(x)=\frac12 x^T A x-b^T x.
This function is strictly convex, so it has one global minimizer.
Its gradient is Ax-b, which vanishes exactly when Ax=b.
The residual r_k=b-Ax_k is the negative gradient of the energy at the current iterate.
A large residual means the energy still has a steep direction of descent.
Steepest descent follows the residual direction.
On elongated quadratic contours, this often causes zigzagging.
The method keeps revisiting directions that were already partly corrected.
Conjugate gradient fixes this by using directions that are orthogonal in the A-inner product.
If p_i^T A p_j=0, then minimizing along p_j does not undo the minimization already achieved along p_i.
After k steps, conjugate gradient chooses the best approximation inside x_0+Krylov K_k(A,r_0).
This is the affine space generated by the initial residual and repeated multiplication by A.
The speed of convergence is controlled by spectral geometry.
A smaller condition number gives a better worst-case bound, and clustered eigenvalues can make convergence even faster.
The main message is that conjugate gradient is energy minimization, gradient descent, orthogonalization, and polynomial approximation all at once.
This is why preconditioning is so powerful: it changes the geometry before CG begins.